Question: Describe a data structure whose elements are pairs of keys \( (a, b) \), where each left key in the pair is an integer in the range \([1, 10n]\). It can be assumed that all the key pairs are distinct. The data structure should support the following operations (where \( n \) is the number of key pairs currently in the data structure):

\begin{itemize}
    \item \texttt{Insert(a, b)} – Adds the key pair \( (a, b) \) to the data structure. The operation should be performed in amortized time \( O(1) \).
    \item \texttt{IncreaseKey((a, b), x)} – This command receives a pointer to the key pair \( (a, b) \) that is in the data structure and a positive number \( x \), and increases the right key by \( x \). The operation should be performed in amortized time \( O(1) \).
    \item \texttt{Delete((a, b))} – This command receives a pointer to the key pair \( (a, b) \) that is in the data structure and deletes it. The operation should be performed in amortized time \( O(\log n) \).
\end{itemize}
3o-mini: We will show that the desired operations can be supported by storing the key pairs as nodes in a Fibonacci heap (more precisely, in a max‐Fibonacci heap) together with a small “side‐table” that, thanks to the fact that the left key a is always in the range [1, 10n], lets you (if needed) quickly locate the node corresponding to a given a value. (In many cases the operations receive a pointer to the node already, so no extra lookup is needed.) In a max‐Fibonacci heap the “priority” of a node is its b value. (That is, bigger b means higher priority.) Notice that Fibonacci heaps are famous for their amortized time bounds:
 • Insertion takes O(1) amortized time.
 • The “decrease‐key” operation takes O(1) amortized time.
 • Deletion (which is implemented by a decrease‐key to –∞ followed by an extract‑min or, in our max‑Fibonacci heap, its analogue) takes O(log n) amortized time.

Since in our data structure we are asked to support IncreaseKey (which “increases” the b value) rather than DecreaseKey, if we adopt the max‑heap view then the IncreaseKey operation plays exactly the role that DecreaseKey does in a min‑heap Fibonacci heap. (That is, if we have a max‑Fibonacci heap and are told “increase the key of this node”, we simply update the b–value and then “bubble it up”—cutting it off its parent if its new key now exceeds that of the parent—in exactly the same way that a Fibonacci heap performs DecreaseKey in a min‑Fibonacci heap. The amortized cost is O(1).)

Let us now describe the idea in more detail.

────────────────────────────
Outline of the Data Structure

1. Storage in a Fibonacci Heap (Max Version):

 a. Each key pair (a, b) is stored in a node of a Fibonacci heap, where the b field is used as the key (that is, the heap is organized so that each node’s b is at least as large as that of its children).

 b. Insertion is done in the usual Fibonacci-heap way: simply create a new node for (a, b) and add it to the root list. This requires only O(1) amortized time.

 c. IncreaseKey is implemented in the natural way: given a pointer to a node (a, b) and a positive number x, update its b–value to b+x. Then, if the new b value is larger than the b value of its parent, cut it from its parent and add it to the root list — and perform cascading cuts as necessary. Since Fibonacci heaps guarantee that such cuts occur only rarely (amortized O(1) cost), the IncreaseKey operation takes O(1) amortized time.

 d. Delete is performed by the standard Fibonacci-heap deletion procedure. (One common approach is to “increase” the node’s key to be larger than any other key, then call extract‑max, which consolidates the heap. Alternatively, one can cut the node out and then consolidate the remaining trees.) This requires O(log n) amortized time.
────────────────────────────
2. The Role of the Left Key a:

 Although none of the above Fibonacci‑heap operations really depend on the left key, we are given that a is always an integer in [1, 10n] and that all key pairs are distinct. This fact can be used to maintain an auxiliary direct‐address table (or array) of size O(n) (more precisely, of size 10n) so that if one needs to locate the node with a given left key a one can do it in O(1) time. (In many of the operations the command is given a pointer to the node anyway, but if you ever need to “find” a node by its left key you can use the array without disturbing the heap’s performance.) 

────────────────────────────
3. Summary of the Operations and Their Amortized Costs:

 • Insert(a, b): Create a new Fibonacci-heap node (storing the pair (a, b)) and add it to the root list. Also add a pointer to this node in the auxiliary array at index a. Cost: O(1) amortized.

 • IncreaseKey((a, b), x): Given a pointer to the node, update its b–value to b+x and, if necessary, cut the node from its parent (and possibly perform cascading cuts) so that the heap property is maintained. Cost: O(1) amortized.

 • Delete((a, b)): Given a pointer to the node, remove it from the Fibonacci heap using the standard deletion procedure (which involves a key “increase” followed by an extract‑max and consolidation). Cost: O(log n) amortized.

────────────────────────────
Thus, by representing the key pairs (a, b) in a Fibonacci heap (viewed as a max‑heap for compatibility with “IncreaseKey”) and using a direct‐address table to “index” nodes by their left key a, we obtain exactly the performance asked for.

This is one way to design a data structure that meets the given amortized time bounds.