Question: Is it possible to implement any search tree such that the insert operation takes \( O(1) \) in the worst case and the delete operation takes \( O(n) \), where \( n \) is the number of elements in the tree?
3o-mini: A short answer is “no” if you require the tree to support efficient key‐ordering (and hence search) in a standard comparison‐based model.

Let’s explain why.

A search tree is usually assumed to maintain the binary search tree invariant (or some variant of it) so that an in‐order traversal produces the keys in sorted order. In every standard search tree (for example, a red–black tree, AVL tree, or even an unbalanced binary search tree), when you want to insert a key you must first “find” the location where the key goes. In the worst case, this search takes at least on the order of the tree’s height (O(log n) for balanced trees or O(n) in the worst case for unbalanced ones). Even if you could make the “linking” step take O(1) (which it does once you know where to attach the new node), the very act of “searching for the insertion point” already costs time.

One might try to design a data structure that “cheats” by postponing the cost of finding the correct insertion position until a deletion or some other rebalancing. In such a design one might indeed perform the insertion work in constant time by, say, linking the new node into a separate list. However, then when you later delete a key (or when you wish to search), you would have to “fix up” the structure—perhaps by integrating the deferred nodes into the main tree—and that fix‐up could take O(n) time.

Thus, while you can “trade” work from one operation to another (and indeed there are amortized data structures that give very good performance on the “average” operation), if you want worst‐case guarantees then you cannot have a structure that is a bona fide search tree (with efficient, logarithmic‐time search) and that has worst‐case O(1) insertion while deletion is allowed to be as bad as O(n).

There is one caveat: If you already were given a pointer to the exact location where the key is to be inserted (so that no search is needed), then the actual linking step can be done in O(1) worst‐case time. But this “helpful assumption” is not normally part of what we mean by “implementing a search tree.”

So in summary, no “nice” search tree exists that in the worst case allows all insertions to run in O(1) time while deletions run in O(n) time, because every insertion must pay at least Ω(log n) time to locate the proper place (if you want to be able to search quickly later).