Question: Is it possible to implement any search tree such that the insert operation takes \( O(1) \) in the worst case and the delete operation takes \( O(n) \), where \( n \) is the number of elements in the tree?
3o-mini: A key requirement of a search tree (by which we mean a dictionary or ordered set based on comparisons) is that when you insert a key you must determine its correct position in the order. In other words, given a key you have to “search” for where to put it. In any nontrivial comparison‐based structure this search step requires at least Ω(log n) time in the worst case (if the tree is balanced) or even Ω(n) time in the worst case (if the tree is completely unbalanced).

One might imagine “cheating” this requirement by designing a data structure where the insert function does nothing more than, say, link a new node into a list (which would indeed be O(1)). However, unless you are provided with extra information—such as a pointer to the exact spot (or “finger”) where the new key belongs—you must at least compare the new key with those already stored to maintain the sorted order. If you somehow “bypass” the search effort during insertion then you have not really implemented a useful search tree since subsequent search operations (or even delete operations, which often require searches) would be forced to pay a heavy penalty (possibly O(n) time).

In brief, if you truly want a search tree that lets you answer membership queries (or perform ordered queries) quickly (sublinear in n in the worst case), then even if you allow yourself to “spoil” deletion (making it take O(n) time) you still can’t achieve an O(1) worst‐case insertion time. The act of inserting a key in its proper sorted position forces you to “pay” at least Ω(log n) time in the balanced case (or worse if the tree becomes degenerate).

So, the answer is no: there is no nontrivial search tree implementation that achieves worst‐case O(1) insertion while guaranteeing that delete is O(n) (or any deletion method) and still retains efficient search properties.