Question: Given an array of $n$ numbers. In all questions, we want to find an element that repeats a certain number of times in the array. If there is more than one such element, we should return one of them.
Propose an algorithm to find the repeating element in each of the following cases:

\textbf{a.} It is known that there is an element that repeats at least $L$ times. In this case, randomness can be used.
3o-mini: We can solve the problem by “guess‐and‐check.” In our case we know that there is an element that appears at least L times, so if we pick an element uniformly at random from the array then its chance of being the heavy (“repeating”) element is at least L/n. (Recall that by “repeating element” we mean one that appears at least L times.) Given this probability we can repeatedly pick a random element and verify whether its count in the array is at least L.

A detailed description of one such randomized algorithm is as follows:

1. Repeat:
   a. Pick an index i uniformly at random from 1 to n.
   b. Let candidate = A[i].
   c. Scan the entire array A and count how many times candidate occurs.
   d. If the count is at least L, return candidate.
   
2. End.

Why it works:
• Since one element (or more) repeats L or more times, when you pick a random element the chance of hitting that candidate is at least L/n.
• Thus, the probability that one trial yields success is at least L/n. Hence the expected number of trials needed is at most n/L.
• In each trial, we perform one full scan of the array (O(n) time). So the overall expected running time is O(n·(n/L)). Note that if L is a significant fraction of n (for example, if L = n/2), this is O(n) expected time.

This simple randomized “guess‐and‐check” algorithm is acceptable unless L is very small (in which case one might need a different approach for efficiency). However, under the assumption that some element appears L times and randomness is allowed, the above method is correct and easy to implement.

Note: If you wanted to reduce the number of scans, an alternative is to take a sample of indices (say, O(n/L) indices) in one go and then count the frequency of each distinct chosen number with one pass over the array (using a hash table to keep frequencies). Either approach is valid.

Thus, one acceptable final answer is:

Algorithm (Randomized Guess‐and‐Check):
1. While true:
 a. Choose i uniformly at random from {1, 2, …, n} and let candidate = A[i].
 b. Compute count = the number of appearances of candidate in A.
 c. If count ≥ L, return candidate.

This algorithm returns an element that repeats at least L times.