Question: Given \(n\) segments on the line (i.e., the input is \(n\) pairs \((x, y)\) of start and end points), a segment is called "central" if there are at least \(n/4\) segments starting before it (its start point is to the left of its start point) and at least \(n/4\) segments ending after it (its end point is to the right of its end point). Propose an algorithm that returns the number of central segments, with the best possible Worst Case running time, and analyze its running time.
3o-mini: We can solve the problem in linear worst‐case time by “reducing” the conditions to simple order‐statistics and then scanning through the segments.

Recall that a segment (with start x and end y) is called “central” if:

  (1) At least n/4 segments have start points to its left (i.e. strictly less than its start point) and
  (2) At least n/4 segments have end points to its right (i.e. strictly greater than its end point).

Let’s assume for now that all start points and end points are distinct; if not, you can use tie–breaking rules or slight modifications.

Step 1. Understand the Conditions in Terms of Order Statistics

If you sort the segments by start point in increasing order, then the condition “at least n/4 segments start before it” means that in this sorted order the segment must appear at an index i where

  i ≥ n/4

(Here, if we index from 0, then the segment at index n/4 has at least n/4 segments preceding it.)

Similarly, if you sort by ending points, then “at least n/4 segments end after it” means that in the sorted order by end values the segment must appear at an index j (when sorting in increasing order) that satisfies

  n – j – 1 ≥ n/4   ⟹  j ≤ 3n/4 – 1.

Thus, if we could quickly find “threshold” values for the start and end coordinates, we could check each segment in one pass.

Step 2. Find the Thresholds using Linear-Time Selection

Let A be the (n/4)-th smallest start coordinate and B be the (3n/4)-th smallest end coordinate. (These are the order–statistic thresholds that “cut off” the first n/4 start values and the last n/4 end values, respectively.) You can find both A and B in worst–case O(n) time using the linear–time selection algorithm (for example, using the median-of-medians algorithm).

Step 3. Count the Central Segments

Once you have the thresholds A and B, you know that a segment (with start x and end y) can only be central if

  x ≥ A  and  y ≤ B.

Simply scan through the n segments and count how many have both x ≥ A and y ≤ B. This check takes O(n) time.

Step 4. Total Running Time and Analysis

• Finding A takes O(n).
• Finding B takes O(n).
• Scanning the segments and counting takes O(n).

Thus, the overall algorithm runs in O(n) worst–case time.

Step 5. Summary of the Algorithm

1. Compute A = (n/4)-th smallest start value using linear–time selection.
2. Compute B = (3n/4)-th smallest end value using linear–time selection.
3. Set count = 0.
4. For each segment (x, y):
  if (x ≥ A) and (y ≤ B) then increment count.
5. Return count.

This algorithm is optimal in the worst case with O(n) running time.

Note: If one is not already familiar with the linear–time selection algorithm, a simpler (but slightly slower) solution is to sort the start and end points (each in O(n log n) time) and then use binary search or an auxiliary table to check each segment, but that would yield an O(n log n) worst–case running time. The above approach using selection gives the best possible worst–case running time of O(n).