Question: Is it possible to implement an AVL tree with an additional operation that returns the smallest element greater than or equal to the average of the elements in \( O(1) \) time, without affecting the runtime of other operations?
3o-mini: The short answer is “no” – you cannot have an AVL tree that, without extra overhead on its other operations, provides an extra operation that in O(1) time returns the smallest element greater than or equal to the average of all elements.

Let’s explain why.

An AVL tree is a balanced binary search tree that supports insert, delete, and search in O(log n) time. To compute the average of all elements, one might think to store the total sum and the count of elements as global variables (or even augment each node with subtree totals and sizes). Then, computing the average is simply a division—an O(1) operation. However, the challenge comes with finding “the smallest element greater than or equal to that average.”

In a binary search tree (including an AVL tree), a typical operation to find the lower bound (or successor) of a given value takes O(log n) time because you must traverse a path from the root downward, comparing the query value with the keys stored in the nodes.

One idea might be to “cache” the result (i.e. store a pointer to that special element) and update that pointer on every insertion or deletion so that later queries can simply return the pointer in O(1) time. However, this cached candidate depends on the global average as well as on the distribution of keys. When you insert a new value or delete an element, both the global sum/count (and hence the average) change, and the property “candidate is the least key ≥ average” may no longer hold. In the worst case, even a small local change can propagate into a change in which node qualifies. Updating the candidate reliably in constant time is not straightforward because almost every change might force you to “re-compute” the candidate in O(log n) time (by descending the tree with a lower‐bound search) to restore correctness.

Thus, while you can keep track of the sum and count in constant time per update (and hence get the average in O(1) time), finding the element that is the lower bound of that average in a vanilla AVL tree generally takes O(log n) time. Efforts to “cache” that answer would require extra bookkeeping on every update; in the worst case, that extra bookkeeping is at least as expensive as performing a O(log n) search in the tree. In other words, you do trade off the constant‐time query for a constant additional cost on every insertion or deletion — if you could do the update in O(1) extra time then you’d be “miraculously” breaking what we know about how lower‐bound searches work in balanced trees.

So, under conventional AVL trees (or similarly augmented balanced trees) and without adding additional data structures that are “outside” the AVL tree (and that would have their own update costs), you cannot implement an extra operation that returns “the smallest element ≥ average” in O(1) time without affecting the runtime of the other operations.

To summarize:

• You can compute the average in O(1) time by maintaining a global sum and count.
• However, finding the smallest element ≥ that average generally requires a lower‐bound search which costs O(log n) time.
• Trying to “cache” the result and update it in O(1) time on every modification would in effect hide an O(log n) update cost—so that the amortized or worst-case update time is increased.

Thus, the requirement of having a constant time query for that operation without impacting the O(log n) runtime of insertions and deletions cannot be met using an AVL tree.