Question: \textit{We insert into a binomial heap (initially empty) the sequence of numbers 1, 2, \ldots, n in ascending order. For two binomial trees in the heap created, with ranks i, j such that i < j, what is the relation between all the values in the tree of rank i and all the values in the tree of rank j? Explain.}
3o-mini: Recall that in a binomial heap each tree is heap‐ordered (the key at any node is no larger than those in its children) and that trees are merged (linked) only when two trees of the same rank appear. When we insert keys in ascending order, every new key is larger than all keys that have already been inserted.

Here’s what happens step by step:

1. When a new key is inserted, it starts off as a singleton tree (of rank 0). Since the keys are increasing, this new key is larger than any key that has been inserted before.

2. If there is already a tree of rank 0, the two trees are merged (linked). In a link the tree with the smaller root (which, by the insertion order, is the older key) becomes the parent. Thus when two trees of rank 0 (with keys x and y where x < y) are linked, you get a tree of rank 1 whose root is x and which contains y as a child. Consequently all keys in a tree that is created as a result of merging (i.e. a tree of rank ≥ 1) come from keys that were inserted earlier than the keys that are still present as singletons (trees of rank 0).

3. This linking process can cascade. In general, when two trees of the same rank are merged:
  • The smaller root becomes the new root.
  • The new tree’s rank is one more than that of the linked trees.
Thus, a tree of higher rank (say rank j) is built by linking trees that were themselves built from earlier (and hence smaller) keys. In contrast, a tree of a lower rank (say rank i with i < j) may still be a singleton (if it never was merged) or came from a later insertion. In either case, the keys in the lower‐rank tree come from later, and hence larger, insertions.

4. Therefore, if you have two trees in the binomial heap with ranks i and j and i < j, then every key in the tree of rank j (the one built from earlier insertions) is smaller than every key in the tree of rank i (which contains keys inserted later).

In summary:
For two binomial trees in the heap with ranks i and j such that i < j, every value in the tree of rank j is less than every value in the tree of rank i. The reason is that the linking process always makes the tree whose root is smaller (coming from an earlier insertion) the parent when two trees of the same rank are merged, and since new insertions are larger than all previous values, lower‐rank trees (which remain separate due to their more recent insertion) contain larger keys.