Question: \textit{We insert into a binomial heap (initially empty) the sequence of numbers 1, 2, \ldots, n in ascending order. For two binomial trees in the heap created, with ranks i, j such that i < j, what is the relation between all the values in the tree of rank i and all the values in the tree of rank j? Explain.}
3o-mini: When we insert 1, 2, . . . , n in ascending order into a binomial heap, the linking (or “merging”) process is carried out in much the same way as binary addition. That is, whenever there are two trees of the same rank, they are linked together to form a new tree whose rank is one larger. In each such link, we compare the roots of the two trees and make the one with the smaller key the new root. This ensures that the entire tree satisfies the heap order (i.e. every parent is smaller than its children).

Now, consider two binomial trees in the final heap: one of rank i and one of rank j where i < j. These trees have never been linked together; if they had been, they would have formed a single tree whose rank would be at least j (in fact, the linking process would continue until there is only one tree of a given rank). The reason they were not linked is inherent in how they were built by the insertion process:

1. When two trees of equal rank are linked, the tree with the smaller root becomes the parent. As a result, all the elements in the “winning” tree (which becomes the new, larger tree) are, by the heap property, smaller than those in the subtree that is attached as a child.

2. Because we are inserting the elements in strictly increasing order, the trees that end up having a lower rank were “completed” earlier in the process. They consist of numbers inserted before the numbers that eventually form the higher‐rank trees.

3. Combining these two facts, it turns out that every time a linking occurs, the tree that “survives” as the root is made up of the earlier (and therefore smaller) numbers. Thus when we have two trees that remain separate in the heap (one of rank i and one of rank j with i < j), all the numbers in the lower-rank tree must have been inserted (and “promoted” by linking) earlier, and hence are smaller than any number in the higher-rank tree.

In summary, for two binomial trees in the heap with ranks i and j such that i < j, every key in the tree of rank i is smaller than every key in the tree of rank j.