Question: \textit{We insert into a binomial heap (initially empty) the sequence of numbers 1, 2, \ldots, n in ascending order. For two binomial trees in the heap created, with ranks i, j such that i < j, what is the relation between all the values in the tree of rank i and all the values in the tree of rank j? Explain.}
3o-mini: We claim that if you have two binomial trees in the heap—with one having rank i and the other rank j where i < j—then every value in the tree of rank i is smaller than every value in the tree of rank j.

Here’s why:

1. When you start, every inserted number forms a one‐node (rank 0) tree. You then merge trees of equal rank. Since you insert 1, 2, …, n in increasing order, any new number is larger than those that came before.

2. During a merge (linking) of two trees of the same rank, the tree whose root has the smaller key becomes the parent. For example, when you insert 1 and then 2, you merge the two rank‑0 trees into a tree of rank 1 with root 1 and child 2.

3. As the process continues, trees merge to form trees of higher rank. Every linking respects the heap order: the root is the smallest in its tree. Because you always add new (larger) elements and merge trees of equal rank using the smaller root as the parent, “older” trees (those formed earlier from smaller numbers) wind up being parts of lower–rank trees, while trees that are created later (and possibly not merged with these “old” trees) are of higher rank.

4. Therefore, if you compare a tree of rank i and a tree of rank j with i < j, all of the values in the lower–rank tree come from earlier (and hence smaller) insertions. Conversely, the tree of higher rank contains some larger values that were inserted later and got merged in during the linking process.

Thus, for any two binomial trees in the heap where the tree of rank i is compared with the tree of rank j (and i < j), every value in the tree of rank i is smaller than every value in the tree of rank j.

This property is a direct consequence of inserting keys in ascending order and the way binomial heap merge (or linking) operations preserve the min–heap order.